doc/manual/mcmc.md, before:

Markov chain Monte Carlo {#cha-mcmc}
============

[TOC]

@todo workhorse of BAT. mention Metropolis algorithm, role of proposal function, different choices in bat, why it has to be adapted in prerun. What else happens in prerun:R value and convergence checking. Mention that samples are correlated, chains can get stuck if model wrong/poor.

@section sec-mcmc-motiv Motivation

The reason that BAT exists is that nearly any Bayesian analysis
these days is too complicated to be handled analytically. To address
typical questions like

* What is known about a single parameter taking into account
  the uncertainty on all other parameters?
* How are parameters correlated?

one needs to be able to compute and visualize 1D and 2D *marginal distributions*; cf. @ref  sec-marginalization. These are defined as integrals over the posterior; for  example in 2D
\f{align}{
  \label{eq:mcmc-marginal}
  P(\theta_1, \theta_2 \cond D) = \int \prod_{i \ne 1,2} \rmdx{\theta_i} P(\vecth \cond D).
\f}
When the number of parameters grows, the only feasible algorithms to
perform the integration are Monte Carlo methods; i.e., methods based
on random numbers.

@todo explain in general the idea of Monte Carlo integration, grid for low dimensions default in BAT

@section sec-mcmc-integration Monte Carlo integration

We begin with the *fundamental Monte Carlo* principle. Suppose we have a
probability density \f$P(\vecth)\f$, often called the *target*
density, and an arbitrary function \f$f(\vecth)\f$ with finite
expectation value under \f$P\f$
\f{align}{
    \label{eq:mc-expect}
    E_P[ f ] = \int \rmdx{ \vecth} P(\vecth) f(\vecth) < \infty .
\f}
Then a
set of draws \f$\{ \vecth_i:i=1 \dots N \}\f$ from the density \f$P\f$, that is \f$\vecth_i \sim P\f$, is
enough to estimate the expectation value. Specifically, the integral
can be replaced by the estimator (distinguished by the symbol
\f$\widehat{\phantom{a}}\f$)
\f{align}{ \label{eq:mc-expect-discrete} \boxed{
\widehat{E_P[f]} \approx \frac{1}{N} \sum_{i=1}^{N} f(\vecth_i), \;
\vecth \sim P  }
\f}
As \f$N \to \infty\f$, the estimate
converges almost surely at a rate \f$\propto 1/\sqrt{N}\f$
by the strong law of large numbers if \f$\int \rmdx{ \vecth}
P(\vecth) f^2(\vecth) < \infty\f$ @cite Casella:2004 .

@anchor mcmc-histogram
@image html histogram.png "Histogram approximation to the 1D marginal."
@image latex histogram.pdf "Histogram approximation to the 1D marginal." width=0.3\textwidth

How does this @latexonly Eq.~\ref{eq:mc-expect-discrete}@endlatexonly
relate to Bayesian inference? Upon applying Bayes’ theorem to
real-life problems, one usually has to marginalize over several
parameters, and this can usually not be done analytically, hence one
has to resort to numerical techniques. In low dimensions, say \f$d \le
2\f$, quadrature and other grid-based methods are fast and accurate,
but as \f$d\f$ increases, these methods generically suffer from the
*curse of dimensionality*. The number of function evaluations grows
exponentially as \f$\order{m^d}\f$, where \f$m\f$ is the number of
grid points in one dimension. Though less accurate in few dimensions,
Monte Carlo — i.e., random-number based — methods are the first choice
in \f$d \gtrsim 3\f$ because the computational complexity is (at least
in principle) independent of \f$d\f$. Which function \f$f\f$ is of
interest to us? For example when integrating over all but the first
dimension of \f$\vecth\f$, the marginal posterior probability
that \f$\theta_1\f$ is in \f$[a,b]\f$ can be estimated as

\f[
\label{eq:disc-marg} P(a \le \theta_1 \le b|D) \approx \frac{1}{N}
\sum_{i=1}^{N} \mathbf{1}_{\theta_1 \in [a,b]} (\vecth_i) \, \f]
with the *indicator function*
\f[ \label{eq:indicator-fct}
\mathbf{1}_{\theta_1 \in [a,b]} (\vecth) = \begin{cases} 1, \theta_1
\in [a,b] \\ 0, {\rm else} \end{cases}
\f]

This follows immediately from the Monte Carlo principle with
\f$f(\vecth) = \mathbf{1}_{\theta_1 \in [a,b]}(\vecth)\f$. The major
simplification arises as we perform the integral over \f$d-1\f$
dimensions simply by ignoring these dimensions in the indicator
function. If the parameter range of \f$\theta_1\f$ is partitioned into
bins, then the above holds in every bin, and defines the histogram
approximation to \f$P(\theta_1|D)\f$. In exact analogy, the 2D
histogram approximation is computed from the samples for 2D bins in
the indicator function. For understanding and presenting the results
of Bayesian parameter inference, the set of 1D and 2D marginal
distributions is the primary goal. Given samples from the full
posterior, we have immediate access to *all* marginal distributions at
once; i.e., there is no need for separate integration to obtain for
example \f$P(\theta_1|D)\f$ and \f$P(\theta_2|D)\f$. This is a major
benefit of the Monte Carlo method in conducting Bayesian inference.

@section sec-mcmc-foundations Foundations

The key ingredient in BAT is an implementation of the Metropolis
algorithm to create a Markov chain; i.e. a sequence of (correlated)
samples from the posterior. We use the shorthand MCMC for Markov chain
Monte Carlo.

Efficient MCMC algorithms are the topic of past and current
research. This section is a concise overview of the general idea and
the algorithms available in BAT. For a broader overview, we refer the
reader to the abundant literature; e.g., @todo Robert+Casella, MCMC
  handbook.

In BAT, there are several variants of the random-walk Metropolis Hastings algorithm available. The basic idea is captured in the @ref random-walk-2D "2D example plot". Given an initial point \f$x_0\f$, the Metropolis algorithm produces a sample in each iteration \f$t=1 \dots\f$ as follows:

* Propose a new point \f$y\f$
* Generate a number u from the uniform distribution on [0,1]
* Set \f$x_{t} = y\f$ if \f$ u < \frac{P(y \cond D)}{P(x_{t-1} \cond D)}\f$
* Else stay, \f$x_t = x_{t-1}\f$

@anchor random-walk-2D
@image html random-walk.png "2D random walk with the Metropolis algorithm."
@image latex random-walk.pdf "2D random walk with the Metropolis algorithm." width=0.5\textwidth

In the example plot, the chain begins in the lower left
corner. Rejected moves are indicated by the dashed arrow, accepted
moves are indicated by the solid arrow. The circled number is the
number of iterations the chain stays at a given point \f$\vecth =
(\theta_1, \theta_2)\f$.

In each iteration \f$i\f$, one updates the estimate of the 1D marginal
distribution \f$P(\theta_1 | D)\f$ by adding the first coordinate of
\f$\vecth_i\f$ to a histogram. Repeat this for all other coordinates
to update the other \f$d-1\f$ 1D marginals.

@todo continue as in Lydia's email
As a concrete example, suppose the chain has 5 iterations..

@section sec-convergence Convergence
@todo mixing, burn in, R value, multimodal problems

@section sec-mcmc-impl Implementation in BAT

Implementing the Metropolis algorithm, one has to decide on how to
propose a new point based on the current point, that is one needs the
*proposal distribution* \f$q(y \cond x, \xi)\f$ with adjustable parameters
\f$\xi\f$. The main difference between MCMC algorithms is typically given
by different choices of \f$q\f$. The Metropolis algorithm doesn't specify
which \f$q\f$ to choose, so we can and have to select a function \f$q\f$ and
tune \f$\xi\f$ according to our needs.

In BAT, the proposal is *symmetric* around the current point
\f{align}{
  q(y \cond x, \xi) = q(x \cond y, \xi).
\f}

The Markov property implies that the proposal may only depend on the
current point \f$x\f$ and not on previous points. If the value of
\f$\xi\f$ is set based on a past sequence of iterations of the chain,
we need two stages of sampling in BAT, the *prerun* and the *main
run*. In the prerun, the chain is run and periodically \f$\xi\f$ is
updated based on the past iterations. In contrast, \f$\xi\f$ is kept
fixed in the main run to have a proper Markov chain.

## Prerun {#sec-mcmc-prerun}

During the prerun, the proposal is updated. BAT considers three criteria to decide when to end the prerun:

### Efficiency {#sec-mcmc-eff}

The *efficiency*, or acceptance rate, is the ratio  of the accepted over the total number proposal moves. A small efficiency means the chain rarely moves but may then make a large move. A large efficiency means the chain explores well locally but may take a long time to explore the entire region of high probability. Optimality results exists only for very special cases: Roberts and Rosenthal showed that for a Gaussian target with \f$d\f$ independent components and a Gaussian proposal, the optimal target efficiency is 23.4 % for \f$d \geq 5\f$ is  but should be larger for small \f$d\f$; e.g., 44 % is best in one dimension @cite rosenthal2011optimal . Based on our experience, we use a default range for the efficiency as \f$[0.15, 0.35]\f$.

@see BCEngineMCMC::SetMinimumEfficiency, BCEngineMCMC::SetMaximumEfficiency

### R value {#sec-mcmc-Rvalue}

The *R value* @cite Gelman:1992 by Gelman and Rubin quantifies the
estimated scale reduction of the uncertainty of an expectation value
estimated with the samples if the chain were run infinitely
long. Informally, it compares the mean and variance of the expectation
value for a single chain with the corresponding results of multiple
chains. If the chains mix despite different initial values, then we
assume that they are independent of the initial value, the burn-in is
over, and the samples produce reliable estimates of quantities of
interest. For a single chain, the \f$R\f$ value cannot be computed.

In BAT, we monitor the expectation value of each parameter and declare
convergence if all R values are below a threshold. Note that the R
values are estimated from batches of samples, and they usually
decrease with more iterations but they may also increase, which
usually is a clear indication that the chains do not mix, perhaps due
to multiple modes that trap the chains.

@see BCEngineMCMC::SetRValueParametersCriterion Set that maximum R value for all parameters. **Default: 1.1**

@see BCEngineMCMC::SetCorrectRValueForSamplingVariability The strict definition of \f$R\f$ corrects the sampling variability due finite batch size. **Default: false**

@see BCEngineMCMC::GetRValueParameters  \f$R\f$ values are computed during the prerun and they can be retrieved but not set.

### Prerun length {#sec-mcmc-prerun-length}

Defining convergence automatically based on the efficiency or the \f$R\f$ value is convenient may be too conservative if the user knows a good initial value, a good proposal, etc. For more control the minimum and maximum length of the prerun can be set, too.

@see BCEngineMCMC::SetNIterationsPreRunMin, BCEngineMCMC::SetNIterationsPreRunMax

@see BCEngineMCMC::SetNIterationsPreRunCheck sets the number of iterations between checks

If desired, the statistics can be cleared to remove the effect of a bad initial point with BCEngineMCMC::SetPreRunCheckClear after some set of iterations

@todo A flow diagram might help

For the user's convenience, multiple settings related to precision of the Markov chain can be set at once using BCEngineMCMC::SetPrecision. The default setting is BCEngineMCMC::kMedium.

## Proposal functions {#sec-mcmc-proposal}

BAT offers two kinds of proposal function termed *factorized* and *multivariate*.

### Factorized proposal {#sec-factorized}

@since Factorized was the default and only choice prior to v1.0 and continues to be available using BCEngineMCMC::SetProposeMultivariate(true)

The factorized proposal in \f$d\f$ dimensions is a product of 1D proposals.

We sequentially vary one parameter at a time and complete
one iteration of the chain once a new point has been proposed in *every*
direction. This means the chain attempts to perform a sequence of
axis-aligned moves in one iteration.

@todo Easiest to understand would be pseudocode

Each 1D proposal is a Cauchy or Breit-Wigner function centered on the
current point. The scale parameter is adapted in the prerun to achieve
an acceptance rate in a given range that can be adjusted by the
user. Note that there is a separate scale parameter in every dimension.

This means the posterior is called \f$d\f$ times in every iteration. Since
the acceptance rate

@todo to define before

is typically different from
zero or one, the factorized proposal typically generates a new point
in every iteration that differs from the previous point in some but
not all dimensions.

### Multivariate proposal {#sec-multivariate}

@since 1.0

Changing all \f$d\f$ parameters at once within one iteration is an
all-or-nothing approach. If the proposed move is accepted, all
parameters have changed for the price of a single evaluation of the
posterior. If the move is rejected, the new point is identical to the
old point and the chain does not explore the parameter space.

We implement the adaptive algorithm @cite Haario:2001 by Haario et al. In
brief, the proposal is a multivariate Gaussian or Student's t
distribution whose covariance is learned from the covariance of
samples in the prerun. An overall scale factor is tuned to force the
acceptance rate into a certain range.

@todo Pseudocode

<!-- ## Prerun {#sec-mcmc-prerun} -->

<!-- @todo Explain main options to adjust length of prerun, updates etc., -->
<!-- discuss proposal-specific options below -->

<!-- The prerun terminates after a maximum number of iterations or if -->
<!-- multiple chains mix according to the R value. Optionally the -->
<!-- minimum/maximum number of iterations can be set with -->
<!-- BCEngineMCMC::SetNIterationsPreRunMin and -->
<!-- BCEngineMCMC::SetNIterationsPreRunMax. -->

## Comparison {#sec-mcmc-proposal-comparison}

Comparing the factorized proposal to the multivariate proposal, we
generally recommend the multivariate for most purposes.

Use the factorized proposal if you can speed up the computation of the
posterior if you know that some parameters did not change. This can be
useful if the computation is expensive if some but not all
parameters change.

Commit message:

[manual] Start integration, swap order with mcmc

doc/manual/mcmc.md, after:

Markov chain Monte Carlo {#cha-mcmc}
============

[TOC]

@todo workhorse of BAT. mention Metropolis algorithm, role of proposal function, different choices in bat, why it has to be adapted in prerun. What else happens in prerun:R value and convergence checking. Mention that samples are correlated, chains can get stuck if model wrong/poor.

@todo overlap with chapter on integration
@section sec-mcmc-motiv Motivation

The reason that BAT exists is that nearly any Bayesian analysis
these days is too complicated to be handled analytically. To address
typical questions like

* What is known about a single parameter taking into account
  the uncertainty on all other parameters?
* How are parameters correlated?

one needs to be able to compute and visualize 1D and 2D *marginal distributions*; cf. @ref  sec-marginalization. These are defined as integrals over the posterior; for  example in 2D
\f{align}{
  \label{eq:mcmc-marginal}
  P(\theta_1, \theta_2 \cond D) = \int \prod_{i \ne 1,2} \rmdx{\theta_i} P(\vecth \cond D).
\f}
Therefore Bayesian inference in practice requires good integration techniques.


For low-dimensional problems, deterministic integration methods are
usually the fastest and most robust. For marginalization, BAT defaults
to evaluating on a grid, that is Riemann integration, for 1D and 2D problems.

@see BCIntegrate::SetMarginalizationMethod(BCIntegrate::kMargGrid)

When the number of parameters grows, the only feasible algorithms to
perform the integration are Monte Carlo methods; i.e., methods based
on random numbers.

@todo explain in general the idea of Monte Carlo integration, grid for low dimensions default in BAT

@section sec-mcmc-integration Monte Carlo integration

We begin with the *fundamental Monte Carlo* principle. Suppose we have a
probability density \f$P(\vecth)\f$, often called the *target*
density, and an arbitrary function \f$f(\vecth)\f$ with finite
expectation value under \f$P\f$
\f{align}{
    \label{eq:mc-expect}
    E_P[ f ] = \int \rmdx{ \vecth} P(\vecth) f(\vecth) < \infty .
\f}
Then a
set of draws \f$\{ \vecth_i:i=1 \dots N \}\f$ from the density \f$P\f$, that is \f$\vecth_i \sim P\f$, is
enough to estimate the expectation value. Specifically, the integral
can be replaced by the estimator (distinguished by the symbol
\f$\widehat{\phantom{a}}\f$)
\f{align}{ \label{eq:mc-expect-discrete} \boxed{
\widehat{E_P[f]} \approx \frac{1}{N} \sum_{i=1}^{N} f(\vecth_i), \;
\vecth \sim P  }
\f}
As \f$N \to \infty\f$, the estimate
converges almost surely at a rate \f$\propto 1/\sqrt{N}\f$
by the strong law of large numbers if \f$\int \rmdx{ \vecth}
P(\vecth) f^2(\vecth) < \infty\f$ @cite Casella:2004 .

@anchor mcmc-histogram
@image html histogram.png "Histogram approximation to the 1D marginal."
@image latex histogram.pdf "Histogram approximation to the 1D marginal." width=0.3\textwidth

How does this @latexonly Eq.~\ref{eq:mc-expect-discrete}@endlatexonly
relate to Bayesian inference? Upon applying Bayes’ theorem to
real-life problems, one usually has to marginalize over several
parameters, and this can usually not be done analytically, hence one
has to resort to numerical techniques. In low dimensions, say \f$d \le
2\f$, quadrature and other grid-based methods are fast and accurate,
but as \f$d\f$ increases, these methods generically suffer from the
*curse of dimensionality*. The number of function evaluations grows
exponentially as \f$\order{m^d}\f$, where \f$m\f$ is the number of
grid points in one dimension. Though less accurate in few dimensions,
Monte Carlo — i.e., random-number based — methods are the first choice
in \f$d \gtrsim 3\f$ because the computational complexity is (at least
in principle) independent of \f$d\f$. Which function \f$f\f$ is of
interest to us? For example when integrating over all but the first
dimension of \f$\vecth\f$, the marginal posterior probability
that \f$\theta_1\f$ is in \f$[a,b]\f$ can be estimated as

\f[
\label{eq:disc-marg} P(a \le \theta_1 \le b|D) \approx \frac{1}{N}
\sum_{i=1}^{N} \mathbf{1}_{\theta_1 \in [a,b]} (\vecth_i) \, \f]
with the *indicator function*
\f[ \label{eq:indicator-fct}
\mathbf{1}_{\theta_1 \in [a,b]} (\vecth) = \begin{cases} 1, \theta_1
\in [a,b] \\ 0, {\rm else} \end{cases}
\f]

This follows immediately from the Monte Carlo principle with
\f$f(\vecth) = \mathbf{1}_{\theta_1 \in [a,b]}(\vecth)\f$. The major
simplification arises as we perform the integral over \f$d-1\f$
dimensions simply by ignoring these dimensions in the indicator
function. If the parameter range of \f$\theta_1\f$ is partitioned into
bins, then the above holds in every bin, and defines the histogram
approximation to \f$P(\theta_1|D)\f$. In exact analogy, the 2D
histogram approximation is computed from the samples for 2D bins in
the indicator function. For understanding and presenting the results
of Bayesian parameter inference, the set of 1D and 2D marginal
distributions is the primary goal. Given samples from the full
posterior, we have immediate access to *all* marginal distributions at
once; i.e., there is no need for separate integration to obtain for
example \f$P(\theta_1|D)\f$ and \f$P(\theta_2|D)\f$. This is a major
benefit of the Monte Carlo method in conducting Bayesian inference.

@section sec-mcmc-foundations Foundations

The key ingredient in BAT is an implementation of the Metropolis
algorithm to create a Markov chain; i.e. a sequence of (correlated)
samples from the posterior. We use the shorthand MCMC for Markov chain
Monte Carlo.

Efficient MCMC algorithms are the topic of past and current
research. This section is a concise overview of the general idea and
the algorithms available in BAT. For a broader overview, we refer the
reader to the abundant literature; e.g., @todo Robert+Casella, MCMC
  handbook.

In BAT, there are several variants of the random-walk Metropolis Hastings algorithm available. The basic idea is captured in the @ref random-walk-2D "2D example plot". Given an initial point \f$x_0\f$, the Metropolis algorithm produces a sample in each iteration \f$t=1 \dots\f$ as follows:

* Propose a new point \f$y\f$
* Generate a number u from the uniform distribution on [0,1]
* Set \f$x_{t} = y\f$ if \f$ u < \frac{P(y \cond D)}{P(x_{t-1} \cond D)}\f$
* Else stay, \f$x_t = x_{t-1}\f$

@anchor random-walk-2D
@image html random-walk.png "2D random walk with the Metropolis algorithm."
@image latex random-walk.pdf "2D random walk with the Metropolis algorithm." width=0.5\textwidth

In the example plot, the chain begins in the lower left
corner. Rejected moves are indicated by the dashed arrow, accepted
moves are indicated by the solid arrow. The circled number is the
number of iterations the chain stays at a given point \f$\vecth =
(\theta_1, \theta_2)\f$.

In each iteration \f$i\f$, one updates the estimate of the 1D marginal
distribution \f$P(\theta_1 | D)\f$ by adding the first coordinate of
\f$\vecth_i\f$ to a histogram. Repeat this for all other coordinates
to update the other \f$d-1\f$ 1D marginals.

@todo continue as in Lydia's email
As a concrete example, suppose the chain has 5 iterations..

@section sec-convergence Convergence
@todo mixing, burn in, R value, multimodal problems

@section sec-mcmc-impl Implementation in BAT

Implementing the Metropolis algorithm, one has to decide on how to
propose a new point based on the current point, that is one needs the
*proposal distribution* \f$q(y \cond x, \xi)\f$ with adjustable parameters
\f$\xi\f$. The main difference between MCMC algorithms is typically given
by different choices of \f$q\f$. The Metropolis algorithm doesn't specify
which \f$q\f$ to choose, so we can and have to select a function \f$q\f$ and
tune \f$\xi\f$ according to our needs.

In BAT, the proposal is *symmetric* around the current point
\f{align}{
  q(y \cond x, \xi) = q(x \cond y, \xi).
\f}

The Markov property implies that the proposal may only depend on the
current point \f$x\f$ and not on previous points. If the value of
\f$\xi\f$ is set based on a past sequence of iterations of the chain,
we need two stages of sampling in BAT, the *prerun* and the *main
run*. In the prerun, the chain is run and periodically \f$\xi\f$ is
updated based on the past iterations. In contrast, \f$\xi\f$ is kept
fixed in the main run to have a proper Markov chain.

## Prerun {#sec-mcmc-prerun}

During the prerun, the proposal is updated. BAT considers three criteria to decide when to end the prerun:

### Efficiency {#sec-mcmc-eff}

The *efficiency*, or acceptance rate, is the ratio  of the accepted over the total number proposal moves. A small efficiency means the chain rarely moves but may then make a large move. A large efficiency means the chain explores well locally but may take a long time to explore the entire region of high probability. Optimality results exists only for very special cases: Roberts and Rosenthal showed that for a Gaussian target with \f$d\f$ independent components and a Gaussian proposal, the optimal target efficiency is 23.4 % for \f$d \geq 5\f$ is  but should be larger for small \f$d\f$; e.g., 44 % is best in one dimension @cite rosenthal2011optimal . Based on our experience, we use a default range for the efficiency as \f$[0.15, 0.35]\f$.

@see BCEngineMCMC::SetMinimumEfficiency, BCEngineMCMC::SetMaximumEfficiency

### R value {#sec-mcmc-Rvalue}

The *R value* @cite Gelman:1992 by Gelman and Rubin quantifies the
estimated scale reduction of the uncertainty of an expectation value
estimated with the samples if the chain were run infinitely
long. Informally, it compares the mean and variance of the expectation
value for a single chain with the corresponding results of multiple
chains. If the chains mix despite different initial values, then we
assume that they are independent of the initial value, the burn-in is
over, and the samples produce reliable estimates of quantities of
interest. For a single chain, the \f$R\f$ value cannot be computed.

In BAT, we monitor the expectation value of each parameter and declare
convergence if all R values are below a threshold. Note that the R
values are estimated from batches of samples, and they usually
decrease with more iterations but they may also increase, which
usually is a clear indication that the chains do not mix, perhaps due
to multiple modes that trap the chains.

@see BCEngineMCMC::SetRValueParametersCriterion Set that maximum R value for all parameters. **Default: 1.1**

@see BCEngineMCMC::SetCorrectRValueForSamplingVariability The strict definition of \f$R\f$ corrects the sampling variability due finite batch size. **Default: false**

@see BCEngineMCMC::GetRValueParameters  \f$R\f$ values are computed during the prerun and they can be retrieved but not set.

### Prerun length {#sec-mcmc-prerun-length}

Defining convergence automatically based on the efficiency or the \f$R\f$ value is convenient may be too conservative if the user knows a good initial value, a good proposal, etc. For more control the minimum and maximum length of the prerun can be set, too.

@see BCEngineMCMC::SetNIterationsPreRunMin, BCEngineMCMC::SetNIterationsPreRunMax

@see BCEngineMCMC::SetNIterationsPreRunCheck sets the number of iterations between checks

If desired, the statistics can be cleared to remove the effect of a bad initial point with BCEngineMCMC::SetPreRunCheckClear after some set of iterations

@todo A flow diagram might help

For the user's convenience, multiple settings related to precision of the Markov chain can be set at once using BCEngineMCMC::SetPrecision. The default setting is BCEngineMCMC::kMedium.

## Proposal functions {#sec-mcmc-proposal}

BAT offers two kinds of proposal function termed *factorized* and *multivariate*.

### Factorized proposal {#sec-factorized}

@since Factorized was the default and only choice prior to v1.0 and continues to be available using BCEngineMCMC::SetProposeMultivariate(true)

The factorized proposal in \f$d\f$ dimensions is a product of 1D proposals.

We sequentially vary one parameter at a time and complete
one iteration of the chain once a new point has been proposed in *every*
direction. This means the chain attempts to perform a sequence of
axis-aligned moves in one iteration.

@todo Easiest to understand would be pseudocode

Each 1D proposal is a Cauchy or Breit-Wigner function centered on the
current point. The scale parameter is adapted in the prerun to achieve
an acceptance rate in a given range that can be adjusted by the
user. Note that there is a separate scale parameter in every dimension.

This means the posterior is called \f$d\f$ times in every iteration. Since
the acceptance rate

@todo to define before

is typically different from
zero or one, the factorized proposal typically generates a new point
in every iteration that differs from the previous point in some but
not all dimensions.

### Multivariate proposal {#sec-multivariate}

@since 1.0

Changing all \f$d\f$ parameters at once within one iteration is an
all-or-nothing approach. If the proposed move is accepted, all
parameters have changed for the price of a single evaluation of the
posterior. If the move is rejected, the new point is identical to the
old point and the chain does not explore the parameter space.

We implement the adaptive algorithm @cite Haario:2001 by Haario et al. In
brief, the proposal is a multivariate Gaussian or Student's t
distribution whose covariance is learned from the covariance of
samples in the prerun. An overall scale factor is tuned to force the
acceptance rate into a certain range.

@todo Pseudocode

<!-- ## Prerun {#sec-mcmc-prerun} -->

<!-- @todo Explain main options to adjust length of prerun, updates etc., -->
<!-- discuss proposal-specific options below -->

<!-- The prerun terminates after a maximum number of iterations or if -->
<!-- multiple chains mix according to the R value. Optionally the -->
<!-- minimum/maximum number of iterations can be set with -->
<!-- BCEngineMCMC::SetNIterationsPreRunMin and -->
<!-- BCEngineMCMC::SetNIterationsPreRunMax. -->

## Comparison {#sec-mcmc-proposal-comparison}

Comparing the factorized proposal to the multivariate proposal, we
generally recommend the multivariate for most purposes.

Use the factorized proposal if you can speed up the computation of the
posterior if you know that some parameters did not change. This can be
useful if the computation is expensive if some but not all
parameters change.
